feat(iota-tx-test-runner/docs): documentation of init, run, publish , print-bytecode task commands (#5128)
iotaledger/iota: crates/iota-transactional-test-runner/syntax.md

## Supported tasks

### `init`

The `init` command initializes the Move test environment. This command is used to set up various parameters such as named addresses, protocol versions, gas limits, and execution settings.

This command is **optional**, but if used, it must be the first command in the test sequence.

> Command should be use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should use the command:
```

Author: Done

- Before running any transactions in a test environment.
- When testing different protocol versions or gas pricing models.
- When working with named accounts and pre-defined addresses.
- For debugging storage behavior with object snapshots.

#### Syntax

```
//# init [OPTIONS]
```

> Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example
```

Author: Done

--custom-validator-account: creates a custom validator account. This is only allowed in simulator mode.
--reference-gas-price <REFERENCE_GAS_PRICE>: Defines a reference gas price for transactions. Only valid in simulator mode.
--default-gas-price <DEFAULT_GAS_PRICE>: sSets the default gas price for transactions. If not specified, the default is `1_000`.
--object-snapshot-min-checkpoint-lag <OBJECT_SNAPSHOT_MIN_CHECKPOINT_LAG>: defines the minimum checkpoint lag for object snapshots. This affects when state snapshots are taken during execution
--object-snapshot-max-checkpoint-lag <OBJECT_SNAPSHOT_MAX_CHECKPOINT_LAG>: defines the maximum checkpoint lag for object snapshots
--flavor <FLAVOR>: Specifies the Move compiler flavor (e.g., Iota). 
The --flavor option in the init command specifies the Move language flavor that will be used in the environment. This option determines the syntax and semantics applied to Move programs and packages in the test adapter(Core or Iota).
--addresses <NAMED_ADDRESSES>: Maps custom named addresses to specific numerical addresses for the Move environment.
```

#### What is the simulator mode?

> This type of execution when we can control the checkpoint, epoch creation process and manually advance clock as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This type of execution allows control of the checkpoint and epoch creation process and manually advances the clock as needed.
```

Author: Done

The simulator mode can be used when you need to debug shared objects or complex Move modules without waiting for full consensus validation.
You want full control over checkpointing and epochs for testing state transitions.

### `print-bytecode`

> Command reads a compiled Move binary and prints its bytecode instructions in a readable format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A command that reads a compiled Move binary and prints its bytecode instructions in a readable format.
```

Author: Done

> Translates the given Move IR module into bytecode, then prints a textual
> representation of that bytecode

#### Syntax

```
//# print-bytecode
```

> Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example
```

Author: Done

       12: Pack[0](TestCoin)
       13: MoveLoc[0](to#0#0: address)
       14: Call 1transfer::public_transfer<TestCoin>(TestCoin, address)
       15: Ret
}
}
```

#### Options

```
--syntax <SYNTAX>: move syntax type (`source` or `ir`).
```

- The `Move IR` is a low-level intermediate representation that closely mirrors Move bytecode. The Move bytecode defines programs published to the blockchain. What mainly differentiates the Move IR from the bytecode is that names are used as opposed to indexes into pools/tables.
- The `Move source` language is a high-level language that compiles to Move bytecode. It is designed to be a familiar and ergonomic language for developers that provides minimal abstractions over the Move bytecode.

Example of `.mvir` code:

```mvir
module 0x0.m {
    import 0x2.clock;

    public entry yes_clock_ref(l0: &clock.Clock) {
        label l0:
        abort 0;
    }
}
```

### `publish`

The publish command allows users to publish Move packages to the IOTA network. This command compiles the specified Move package and deploys it to the network, optionally marking it as upgradable.

#### Syntax

```
//# publish [OPTIONS]
```

> Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example
```

Author: Done

```move
//# publish --sender acc1 --upgradeable --gas-price 1000
module test::transfer {
    public struct TestCoin has key, store {
        id: UID,
        amount: u64
    }

    public entry fun transfer(to: address, amount: u64, ctx: &mut TxContext) {
        let balance = 100;
        assert!(balance >= amount, 1);
        let id = object::new(ctx);
        let test_coin = TestCoin { id, amount };
        transfer::public_transfer(test_coin, to);
    }
}
```

> - Publishes transfer.move on-chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Publishes `transfer.move` on-chain.
```

Author: Done

> - acc1 is the sender.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `acc1` is the sender.
```

Author: Done

--dependencies <DEPENDENCIES>: a list of package dependencies that this package relies on. These dependencies should already be published
--gas-price <GAS_PRICE>: specifies the gas price to use for the transaction. If not provided, the default gas price is used   
--gas-budget <GAS_BUDGET>: gas limit for execution
--syntax <SYNTAX>: move syntax type (`source` or `ir`).
```

### `run`

The `run` command is used to execute a function from a Move module.

#### Syntax

```
//# run [OPTIONS] [NAME]
```

`[NAME]` specified - `<ADDRESS>::<MODULE_NAME>::<FUNCTION_NAME>`

#### Options

```
--sender <SENDER>: defines the account initiating the transaction.
--gas-price <GAS_PRICE>: specifies the gas price for the transaction.
--summarize: enables summarized output of execution results
--signers <SIGNERS>: specifies who signs the transaction.
--args <ARGS>: specific arguments to pass into the function.
--type-args <TYPE_ARGS>: type arguments for generic functions.
--gas-budget <GAS_BUDGET>: gas limit for execution.
--syntax <SYNTAX>: move syntax type (`source` or `ir`).
```

> Example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example
```

Author: Done with additional # :D

```move
//# init --addresses test=0x0 --accounts acc1 acc2 --protocol-version 1

//# publish

module test::transfer {
    public struct TestCoin has key, store {
        id: UID,
        amount: u64
    }

    public entry fun transfer(to: address, amount: u64, ctx: &mut TxContext) {
        let balance = 100;
        assert!(balance >= amount, 1);
        let id = object::new(ctx);
        let test_coin = TestCoin { id, amount };
        transfer::public_transfer(test_coin, to);
    }
}

//# run test::transfer::transfer --sender acc1 --gas-price 500 --args @acc2 50

//# view-object 2,0
```

> `test::transfer` should have been published already before `run` command execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`test::transfer` should have been published already before you can `run` the command execution.
```

Author: Done

- Runs transfer function.

> - acc1 is the sender.
> - @acc2 is an identifier of recepient address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `acc1` is the sender.
- `@acc2` is an identifier of recipient address.
```

Author: Done

### `init`

> The `init` command initializes the Move test environment. It is optional but, if used, must be the first command in a test file. This command is used to set up various parameters such as named addresses, protocol versions, gas limits, and execution settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `init` command initializes the Move test environment. This command is used to set up various parameters such as named addresses, protocol versions, gas limits, and execution settings.
```
To remove because it is duplicated below

Author: Done

--max-gas <MAX_GAS>: sets the maximum gas allowed per transaction. Only valid in non-simulator mode.                                   
--shared-object-deletion <SHARED_OBJECT_DELETION>: enables or disables the deletion of shared objects during execution.
--simulator: runs the test adapter in simulator mode, allowing manual control over checkpoint creation and epoch advancement.
--custom-validator-account: creates a custom validator account. This is only allowed in simulator mode.
--reference-gas-price <REFERENCE_GAS_PRICE>: Defines a reference gas price for transactions. Only valid in simulator mode.
--default-gas-price <DEFAULT_GAS_PRICE>: sSets the default gas price for transactions. If not specified, the default is `1_000`.
--object-snapshot-min-checkpoint-lag <OBJECT_SNAPSHOT_MIN_CHECKPOINT_LAG>: defines the minimum checkpoint lag for object snapshots. This affects when state snapshots are taken during execution
--object-snapshot-max-checkpoint-lag <OBJECT_SNAPSHOT_MAX_CHECKPOINT_LAG>: defines the maximum checkpoint lag for object snapshots
--flavor <FLAVOR>: Specifies the Move compiler flavor (e.g., Iota).

> The --flavor option in the init command specifies the Move language flavor that will be used in the environment. This option determines the syntax and semantics applied to Move programs and packages in the test adapter(Core or Iota).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
--flavor <FLAVOR>: Specifies the Move compiler flavor (e.g., Iota). The --flavor option in the init command specifies the Move language flavor that will be used in the environment. This option determines the syntax and semantics applied to Move programs and packages in the test adapter(Core or Iota).
```

Author: Done

--addresses <NAMED_ADDRESSES>: Maps custom named addresses to specific numerical addresses for the Move environment.
```

#### What is the simulator mode? 
This type of execution when we can control the checkpoint, epoch creation process and manually advance clock as needed.

> YOu have to use simulator mode when you need to debug shared objects or complex Move modules without waiting for full consensus validation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The simulator mode can be used when you need to debug shared objects or complex Move modules without waiting for full consensus validation.
```

Author: Done

You want full control over checkpointing and epochs for testing state transitions.

### `print-bytecode`

Command reads a compiled Move binary and prints its bytecode instructions in a readable format.

> Translates the given Move IR module into bytecode, then prints a textual
> representation of that bytecode

#### Syntax

```
//# print-bytecode
```

Example:

```
//# print-bytecode

module 0x2::counter {
    struct Counter has key, store {
        value: u64,
    }

    public fun new(): Counter {
        Counter { value: 0 }
    }

    public fun increment(counter: &mut Counter) {
        counter.value = counter.value + 1;
    }
}
```

#### Options

```

> --syntax <SYNTAX>: move syntax type (`source` or `ir`).

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to briefly write the difference between source and ir

Author: I wrote it a bit below

```
`Source` files have `.move` extension. 
Represents a standard Move source code syntax.
`IR` files have `.mvir` extension. Represents a Move bytecode syntax, in order to debugging bytecode execution.
```

I can duplicate it for each --syntax param

Reviewer 2: Please check the `external-crates/move` readme:
- The Move IR is a low-level intermediate representation that closely mirrors Move bytecode. The Move bytecode defines programs published to the blockchain. What mainly differentiates the Move IR from the bytecode is that names are used as opposed to indexes into pools/tables. 
- The Move source language is a high-level language that compiles to Move bytecode. It is designed to be a familiar and ergonomic language for developers that provides minimal abstractions over the Move bytecode.

Reviewer 2: No need to duplicate this into other commands!

Author: Updated

```

### `publish`

The publish command allows users to publish Move packages to the IOTA network. This command compiles the specified Move package and deploys it to the network, optionally marking it as upgradable.

#### Syntax

```

> //# publish [OPTIONS]

Reviewer 2: I think here the first value is not an option but a path to a file?

Author: No, it doesn’t have such arg

```
publish [OPTIONS]

Options:
      --sender <SENDER>                 
      --upgradeable                     
      --dependencies <DEPENDENCIES>...  
      --gas-price <GAS_PRICE>           
      --gas-budget <GAS_BUDGET>         
      --syntax <SYNTAX>                 
  -h, --help                            Print help
```

I’ll update examples

```

```move
module 0x2::counter {
    struct Counter has key, store {
        value: u64,
    }

    public fun new(): Counter {
        Counter { value: 0 }
    }

    public fun increment(counter: &mut Counter) {
        counter.value = counter.value + 1;
    }
}
```

 - Publishes counter.move on-chain.
 - acc1 is the sender.
 - The module is marked as upgradeable.
 - Gas price is set to 1000.

#### Options

```
--sender <SENDER>: specifies the account that will be used to publish the package. If not provided, the default account is used.              
--upgradeable: if specified, the package will be published as upgradeable, meaning it can be upgraded later with the `upgrade` command.
--dependencies <DEPENDENCIES>: a list of package dependencies that this package relies on. These dependencies should already be published
--gas-price <GAS_PRICE>: specifies the gas price to use for the transaction. If not provided, the default gas price is used   
--gas-budget <GAS_BUDGET>: gas limit for execution
--syntax <SYNTAX>: move syntax type (`source` or `ir`).
```

### `run`

The `run` command is used to execute a function from a Move module.

#### Syntax

```

> //# task run [OPTIONS] [NAME]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
//# run [OPTIONS] [NAME]
```

Reviewer 2: also, before the [options] do we need to specify a file path?

Author: I’ll update examples

```
`[NAME]` specified - `<ADDRESS>::<MODULE_NAME>::<FUNCTION_NAME>`

Example:

```

> //# run transfer.move --sender acc1 --gas-price 500 --syntax source

Reviewer 2: is it correct? isn't it missing the function name?

Author: Fixed

--summarize: enables summarized output of execution results
--signers <SIGNERS>: specifies who signs the transaction.
--args <ARGS>: specific arguments to pass into the function.
--type-args <TYPE_ARGS>: type arguments for generic functions.
--gas-budget <GAS_BUDGET>: gas limit for execution.
--syntax <SYNTAX>: move syntax type (`source` or `ir`).
```
`Source` files have `.move` extension. 
Represents a standard Move source code syntax.
`IR` files have `.mvir` extension. Represents a Move bytecode syntax, in order to debugging bytecode execution.

Example of `.mvir` code:
```mvir
module 0x1.Counter {
    struct Counter has copy, drop { value: u64 }

    public entry increment() {
        let counter_ref: &mut Counter;
        let counter: Counter;
    label start:
        counter_ref = borrow_global_mut<Counter>(0x1);
        *counter_ref = Counter { value: (*counter_ref).value + 1 };
        return;
    }
}
```

Analog represention of `.move` syntax:
``` move
module 0x1::Counter {
    struct Counter has key { value: u64 }

    public entry fun increment() {
        let counter = &mut borrow_global_mut<Counter>(@0x1);
        counter.value = counter.value + 1;
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Could be moved under print bytecode I think

Author: Done

Represents a standard Move source code syntax.
`IR` files have `.mvir` extension. Represents a Move bytecode syntax, in order to debugging bytecode execution.

Example of `.mvir` code:

```mvir
module 0x0.m {
    import 0x2.clock;

    public entry yes_clock_ref(l0: &clock.Clock) {
        label l0:
        abort 0;
    }
}
```

### `publish`

The publish command allows users to publish Move packages to the IOTA network. This command compiles the specified Move package and deploys it to the network, optionally marking it as upgradable.

#### Syntax

```
//# publish [OPTIONS]
```

Example:

```move
//# publish --sender acc1 --upgradeable --gas-price 1000
module test::transfer {
    public struct TestCoin has key, store {
        id: UID,
        amount: u64
    }

    public entry fun transfer(to: address, amount: u64, ctx: &mut TxContext) {
        let balance = 100;
        assert!(balance >= amount, 1);
        let id = object::new(ctx);
        let test_coin = TestCoin { id, amount };
        transfer::public_transfer(test_coin, to);
    }
}
```

- Publishes transfer.move on-chain.
- acc1 is the sender.
- The module is marked as upgradeable.
- Gas price is set to 1000.

> .exp output:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`.exp` output:
```

Author: Done
